Website: Update graphQL documentation (#1594)
keystonejs/keystone-5: docs/guides/intro-to-graphql.md

<!--[meta]
section: guides
title: GraphQL
[meta]-->

# Introduction to the GraphQL API

_Before you begin:_ This guide assumes you have running instance of Keystone with the GraphQL App configured, and a list with some data to query.

Examples in this guide will refer to a `Users` list, however the queries, mutations and methods listed here would be the same for any Keystone list.

For each List, Keystone generates four top level queries. Given the following example:

```javascript
keystone.createList('User', {
  fields: {
    name: { type: Text },
  },
});
```

## Queries

Keystone would generate the following queries:

- `allUsers`
- `_allUsersMeta`
- `User`
- `_UserMeta`

> ### allUsers

Author: I'm avoiding that in heading. It tends to look really bad. Maybe this is just a style thing we need to fix with the website but for now I'd like to be consistent with the rest of the docs

> ### allUsers

Reviewer: Yep, consistency is good 👍 

Personally, I think it looks _better_, but like you said; it's a stylistic thing and not a big issue!

> Retrieves all items from the user list. The `allUsers` queries accept a set standard list of query arguments that allow you to search, limit and filter results. See: [Search and Filtering](#search-and-filtering).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves all items from the user list. The `allUsers` query also allows you to search, limit and filter results. See: [Search and Filtering](#search-and-filtering).
```

#### Usage

```gql
query {
  allUsers {
    id
  }
}
```

### \_allUsersMeta

> Retrieves all items meta for the user list. Currently used to return a count of all items which can be used for pagination. The `_allUsersMeta` query accepts the same [search and filtering](#search-and-filtering) parameters as the `allUsers` query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves meta information about items in the user list such as a `count` of all items which can be used for pagination. The `_allUsersMeta` query accepts the same [search and filtering](#search-and-filtering) parameters as the `allUsers` query.
```

#### Usage

```gql
query {
  _allUsersMeta {
    count
  }
}
```

### User

> Retrieves a single item from the User list. The single entity query accepts a where parameter which must have provide an id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves a single item from the User list. The single entity query accepts a where parameter which must provide an id.
```

#### Usage

```gql
query {
  User(where: { id: ID }) {
    name
  }
}
```

> ### \_UserMeta

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### \_UsersMeta
```

> Unlike `_allUsersMeta` this returns metadata relating to the list such as access control information. This query accepts no parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves meta information about the user list itself (ie; not about items in the list) such as access control information. This query accepts no parameters.
```

## Mutations

For each list Keystone generates six top level mutations:

- `createUser`
- `createUsers`
- `updateUser`
- `updateUsers`
- `deleteUser`
- `deleteUsers`

### createUser

> Add a single User to the Users list. Requires a `data` parameter that is an object where keys match the field names in the list definition and the values are the data to create.

Reviewer: There's a minor inconsistency in this page; the list is sometimes referred to as a mix of upper case and lower case and singular and plural. I think it best to settle on the list name in the singular form, wrapped in backticks to ensure it is obvious we're referring what the list is called. ie; `User`.

Author: Sure!

#### Usage

```gql
mutation {
  createUser(data: { name: "Mike" }) {
    id
  }
}
```

### createUsers

Creates multiple users. Parameters are the same as `createUser` except the data parameter should be an array of objects.

#### Usage

```gql
mutation {
  createUsers(data: [{ name: "Mike" }]) {
    id
  }
}
```

### updateUser

> Update a User by ID. Accepts an `id` parameter that should match the id of a user item. The object should contain keys matching the field definition of the list. Only keys that you wish to update need to be provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update a User by ID. Accepts an `id` parameter that should match the id of a user item. The object should contain keys matching the field definition of the list. `updateUser` performs a _partial update_, meaning only keys that you wish to update need to be provided.
```

#### Usage

```gql
mutation {
  updateUser(id: ID, data: { name: "Simon" }) {
    id
  }
}
```

### updateUsers

Update multiple Users by ID. Accepts a single data parameter that contains an array of objects. The object parameters are the same as `createUser` and should contain an `id` and nested `data` parameter with the field data.

```gql
mutation {
  updateUsers(data: [{ id: ID, data: { name: "Simon" } }]) {
    id
  }
}
```

### deleteUser

Delete a single Entity by ID. Accepts a single parameter where the `id` matches a user id.

```gql
mutation {
  deleteUser(id: ID)
}
```

### deleteUsers

Delete multiple entities by ID. Similar to `deleteUser` where the `id` parameter is an array of ids.

```gql
mutation {
  deleteUsers(id: [ID])
}
```

## Executing Queries and Mutations

Before you begin writing application code, a great place test queries and mutations is the [GraphQL Playground](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/features/graphql-playground/). The default path for Keystone's GraphQl Playground is `http://localhost:3000/admin/graphql`. Here you can execute queries and mutations against the Keystone API without writing any JavaScript.

> Once you have determined the correct query or mutation, you can add this to a front-end application. To do this you will need to submit a `POST` request to Keystone's API. The default API endpoint is: `http://localhost:3000/admin/api`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have determined the correct query or mutation, you can add this to your application. To do this you will need to submit a `POST` request to Keystone's API. The default API endpoint is: `http://localhost:3000/admin/api`.
```

There are other types of applications which might consume Keystone APIs, such as other APIs, backends in node, etc.

> In our examples we're going to use the browser's [Fetch API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) for older browsers you may need to polyfill this or use a library like [axios](https://github.com/axios/axios).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our examples we're going to use the browser's [Fetch API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) to make a `POST` request.
```

I'm happy to leave out polyfilling. If they're supporting old browsers, they know this already, and [`fetch` has >93% support](https://caniuse.com/#search=fetch)

Author: Yeah I know... It's not so great on the mobile segment I think meaning still an issue for some. I'm not strong on opinions here so if you want to leave it out, fine.

Reviewer: That 93% stat includes mobile too. The only ones that don't support it are mobile IE (wtf even is that? :P ) and mobile Opera (which is a horrible browser anyway). I'd prefer to remove it to avoid the cognitive pitfall of someone accidentally thinking they _need_ the polyfill.

First of all let's save a simple query in a variable:

```javascript
const GET_ALL_USERS = `
query GetUsers {
  allUsers {
    name
    id
  }
}`;
```

We can then execute this query using a `POST` request:

```javascript
fetch('/admin/api', {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json',
  },
  body: {
    query: GET_ALL_USERS,
  },
}).then(result => result.json());

> ```

Reviewer: Can we combine the above two steps into a single example? There's no technical need to split things out into a separate variable, and it keep the example together + copy-pastable:

```javascript
fetch('/admin/api', {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json',
  },
  body: {
    query: `
      query GetUsers {
        allUsers {
          name
          id
        }
      }
    `,
  },
}).then(result => result.json());
```

Author: Do you think this reads better? I kinda wanted them to think about the query first then the post, then add variables to it later. Building on....

Again not strongly opinionated - I just want something that will be a starting point for people.

Reviewer: That's a great point! Perhaps keep them seperate, but combine them into the same code block? Best of both worlds!

Author: Cool I'll have slight reword here and see if I can make it flow better

The result should contain a `JSON` payload with the results from the query.

Executing mutations is the same, however we need to pass variables along with the mutation:

```javascript
const ADD_USER = `
mutation AddUser($name: String!) {
  createUser(data: { name: $name }) {
    name
    id
  }
}`;
```

The key for mutations is still `query`:

```javascript
fetch('/admin/api', {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json',
  },
  body: {
    query: ADD_USER,
    variables: { name: 'Mike' },
  },
}).then(result => result.json());
```

> **Note: ** Queries via the API will enforce [Access Control](https://v5.keystonejs.com/api/access-control).

Reviewer: While important, is this an appropriate point to bring up Access Control? It's a potential rabbit hole and throws off the cadence of this guide.

## Executing Queries and Mutations on the Server

> In addition to executing queries via the API, you can execute queries and mutations on the server using the `keystone.executeQuery` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to executing queries via the API, you can execute queries and mutations on the server using [the `keystone.executeQuery()` method](https://v5.keystonejs.com/keystone-alpha/keystone/#executequeryquerystring-config).
```

> **Note: ** No access control checks are run when executing queries on the server. Any queries or mutations that checked for `context.req` in the resolver may also return different results as the `req` object is set to `{}`.

Reviewer: Similar question about Access Control; this probably isn't an appropriate point to raise this for fear of breaking the reader's flow.

Author: I think it's pretty important and should be somewhere in this section. I'd hate for someone to miss this point.

> See: [Keystone executeQuery()](https://v5.keystonejs.com/keystone-alpha/keystone/#executequeryquerystring-config)

Reviewer: Suggested to combine this with the sentence above ☝️

> ## Search and Filtering

Reviewer: I like the way you describe it in the first sentence more than this heading, what do you think of this suggestion?

```suggestion
## Filter, Limit and Sorting
```

Author: No opinion

When executing queries and mutations there are a number of ways you can filter, limit and sort items. These include:

- `where`
- `search`
- `skip`
- `first`
- `orderby`

#### `where`

Limit results to items matching the where clause. Where clauses are used to query fields in a keystone list before retrieving data.

The options available in a where clause depend on the field types.

```gql
query {

>   allUsers (where: { id_starts_with_i: 'A'} ) {

Reviewer: I don't think `id_starts_with_i` is a valid where clause :P

```suggestion
  allUsers (where: { name_starts_with_i: 'A'} ) {
```

    id
  }
}
```

##### Relationship `where` filters

- `{relatedList}_every`: whereInput
- `{relatedList}_some`: whereInput
- `{relatedList}_none`: whereInput
- `{relatedList}_is_null`: Boolean

##### String `where` filters

- `{Field}:` String
- `{Field}_not`: String
- `{Field}_contains`: String
- `{Field}_not_contains`: String
- `{Field}_starts_with`: String
- `{Field}_not_starts_with`: String
- `{Field}_ends_with`: String
- `{Field}_not_ends_with`: String
- `{Field}_i`: String
- `{Field}_not_i`: String
- `{Field}_contains_i`: String
- `{Field}_not_contains_i`: String
- `{Field}_starts_with_i`: String
- `{Field}_not_starts_with_i`: String
- `{Field}_ends_with_i`: String
- `{Field}_not_ends_with_i`: String
- `{Field}_in`: [String]
- `{Field}_not_in`: [String]

##### ID `where` filters

- `{Field}`: ID
- `{Field}_not`: ID
- `{Field}_in`: [ID!]
- `{Field}_not_in`: [ID!]

##### Integer `where` filters

- `{Field}: Int`
- `{Field}_not`: Int
- `{Field}_lt`: Int
- `{Field}_lte`: Int
- `{Field}_gt`: Int
- `{Field}_gte`: Int
- `{Field}_in`: [Int]

> - `{Field}_not_in`: [Int]

Reviewer: I think it's better to link out to the field types where these filters should be documented rather than having an (incomplete) list here which could potentially get out of date. ☝️

Author: Agree, I'll create myself a task to do this once there is consistency in how this is document on the field types. For now I'm going to leave this list here as something is better than nothing.

I'll add a note to refer to the GQL playground docs for a complete reference

#### Operators

You can combine multiple where clauses with `AND` or `OR` operators.

- `AND`: [whereInput]

> - `OR`: [whereInput]

Reviewer: This would benefit from an example:

```gql
query {
  allUsers (where: {
    OR: [
      { name_starts_with_i: 'A' },
      { email_starts_with_i: 'A' },
    ]
  } ) {
    id
  }
}
```

Author: Yeah I thought the same. Didn't want this to get too big but I guess if you thought this too maybe we should add it.

#### `search`

> Will search the list to limit results.

Reviewer: This is currently broken for a few reasons. Perhaps we should remove it?

Author: I wanted to ask actually how it works actually. I kinda glossed over it because I didn't know much. 

Perhaps we should list the bugs because it's documented in the gql playground? People will find it.

```gql
query {
  allUsers(search: "Mike") {
    id
  }
}
```

#### `orderBy`

> Order results. The orderBy string should match a field name in the List.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Order results. The orderBy string should match the format `<field>_<ASC|DESC>`. For example, to order by name descending (alphabetical order, A -> Z):
```

```gql
query {

>   allUsers(orderBy: "name") {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  allUsers(orderBy: "name_DESC") {
```

    id
  }
}
```

#### `first`

Limits the number of items returned from the query. Limits will be applied after `skip`, `orderBy`, `where` and `search` values are applied.

If less results are available, the number of available results will be returned.

```gql
query {
  allUsers(first: 10) {
    id
  }
}
```

#### `skip`

```gql
query {
  allUsers(skip: 10) {
    id
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: All other sections have the description first and the example second, except `skip` - was this on purpose?

Author: Nope, mistake :)

Skip the number of results specified. Is applied before `first` parameter, but after `orderBy`, `where` and `search` values.

If the value of `skip` is greater than the number of available results, zero results will be returned.

## Custom queries and Mutations

> You can add to the keystones generated schema with custom types, queries, and mutations using the `keystone.extendGraphQLSchema` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add to Keystone's generated schema with custom types, queries, and mutations using the `keystone.extendGraphQLSchema()` method.
```

### Usage

```javascript
keystone.extendGraphQLSchema({
  types: ['type FooBar { foo: Int, bar: Float }'],
  queries: [
    {
      schema: 'double(x: Int): Int',
      resolver: (_, { x }) => 2 * x,
    },
  ],
  mutations: [
    {
      schema: 'double(x: Int): Int',
      resolver: (_, { x }) => 2 * x,
    },
  ],
});

> ```

Reviewer: Nice examples 👍

> ### Combining query arguments for pagination

Reviewer: Should this section be swapped with `Custom queries and Mutations` so it comes immediately after the descriptions of `skip` and `first`, giving it a better top-to-bottom flow in the document?

Author: Sure!

When `first` and `skip` are used together with the `count` from `_allUsersMeta`, this is sufficient to implement pagination on the list.

It is important to provide the same `where` and `search` arguments to both the `allUser` and `_allUserMeta` queries. For example:

```gql
query {
  allUsers (search:'a', skip: 10, first: 10) {
    id
  }
  _allUsersMeta(search: 'a') {
    count
  }
}
```

> When `first` and `skip` are used together, skip works as an offset for the `first` argument. For example`(skip:10, first:10)` selects results 11 through 20.

Reviewer: I like to avoid ambiguities in examples like this, so would suggest using different values for the different parameters:

```suggestion
When `first` and `skip` are used together, skip works as an offset for the `first` argument. For example`(skip:10, first:5)` selects results 11 through 25.
```

Author: The suggested change is wrong right? It would select `11` through `15`? I don't mind what numbers are used as and example, whatever is correct is fine.

Reviewer 2: Should we also mention the effect of  `queryLimits` list config when searching, if any?

Examples in this guide will refer to a `Users` list, however the queries, mutations and methods listed here would be the same for any Keystone list.

For each List, Keystone generates four top level queries. Given the following example:

```javascript
keystone.createList('User', {
  fields: {
    name: { type: Text },
  },
});
```

## Queries

Keystone would generate the following queries:

- `allUsers`
- `_allUsersMeta`
- `User`
- `_UsersMeta`

### allUsers

Retrieves all items from the user list. The `allUsers` query also allows you to search, limit and filter results. See: [Search and Filtering](#search-and-filtering).

#### Usage

```gql
query {
  allUsers {
    id
  }
}
```

### \_allUsersMeta

Retrieves meta information about items in the user list such as a `count` of all items which can be used for pagination. The `_allUsersMeta` query accepts the same [search and filtering](#search-and-filtering) parameters as the `allUsers` query.

#### Usage

```gql
query {
  _allUsersMeta {
    count
  }
}
```

### User

Retrieves a single item from the User list. The single entity query accepts a where parameter which must provide an id.

#### Usage

```gql
query {

>   User(where: { id: ID }) {

Reviewer 2: `ID` is not optional, perhaps we should make use of `ID!` wherever possible.
